# Data Modeling with Postgres

## Purpose of Project
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. They'd like to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. 

## Project Description 
Build and model a star schema Postgres database with fact and dimension tables for a focus on analytics.  Write and ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

## Source Dataset

### Song Dataset
> The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```txt
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

> And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```json
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset

> The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

> The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```shell
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

> And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-01-events.json, looks like.

```
{"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Walter","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Frye","length":null,"level":"free","location":"San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540919166796.0,"sessionId":38,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1541105830796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"39"}
```

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

#### Fact Table

1.  **songplays**  - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page  `NextSong`
    -   _songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent_

#### Dimension Tables

2.  **users**  - users in the app
    -   _user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level_
3.  **songs**  - songs in music database
    -   _song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration_
4.  **artists**  - artists in music database
    -   _artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude_
5.  **time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
    -   _start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday_

## Code 
To run the project download the files to a local folder and run the following commands:
##### To create database and tables:
` python3 create_tables.py ` 

##### To run ETL and load tables:
` python3 etl.py `

